<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
			<p>They strolled down the street, and Hal remarked, “That’s the first word I’ve heard here about a union.”</p>
			<p>Mary looked about her nervously. “Hush!” she whispered.</p>
			<p>“But I thought you said you were talking about it!”</p>
			<p>She answered, “ ’Tis one thing, talkin’ in a friend’s house, and another outside. What’s the good of throwin’ away your job?”</p>
			<p>He lowered his voice. “Would you seriously like to have a union here?”</p>
			<p>“Seriously?” said she. “Didn’t ye see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rafferty⁠—what a coward he is? That’s the way they are! No, ’twas just a burst of my temper. I’m a bit crazy tonight⁠—something happened to set me off.”</p>
			<p>He thought she was going on, but apparently she changed her mind. Finally he asked, “What happened?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, ’twould do no good to talk,” she answered; and they walked a bit farther in silence.</p>
			<p>“Tell me about it, won’t you?” he said; and the kindness in his tone made its impression.</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis not much ye know of a coal-camp, Joe Smith,” she said. “Can’t ye imagine what it’s like⁠—bein’ a woman in a place like this? And a woman they think good-lookin’!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, so it’s that!” said he, and was silent again. “Someone’s been troubling you?” he ventured after a while.</p>
			<p>“Sure! Someone’s always troublin’ us women! Always! Never a day but we hear it. Winks and nudges⁠—everywhere ye turn.”</p>
			<p>“Who is it?”</p>
			<p>“The bosses, the clerks⁠—anybody that has a chance to wear a stiff collar, and thinks he can offer money to a girl. It begins before she’s out of short skirts, and there’s never any peace afterwards.”</p>
			<p>“And you can’t make them understand?”</p>
			<p>“I’ve made them understand me a bit; now they go after my old man.”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“Sure! D’ye suppose they’d not try that? Him that’s so crazy for liquor, and can never get enough of it!”</p>
			<p>“And your father?⁠—” But Hal stopped. She would not want that question asked!</p>
			<p>She had seen his hesitation, however. “He was a decent man once,” she declared. “ ’Tis the life here, that turns a man into a coward. ’Tis everything ye need, everywhere ye turn⁠—ye have to ask favours from some boss. The room ye work in, the dead work they pile on ye; or maybe ’tis more credit ye need at the store, or maybe the doctor to come when ye’re sick. Just now ’tis our roof that leaks⁠—so bad we can’t find a dry place to sleep when it rains.”</p>
			<p>“I see,” said Hal. “Who owns the house?”</p>
			<p>“Sure, there’s none but company houses here.”</p>
			<p>“Who’s supposed to fix it?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kosegi, the house-agent. But we gave him up long ago⁠—if he does anything, he raises the rent. Today my father went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cotton. He’s supposed to look out for the health of the place, and it seems hardly healthy to keep people wet in their beds.”</p>
			<p>“And what did Cotton say?” asked Hal, when she stopped again.</p>
			<p>“Well, don’t ye know Jeff Cotton⁠—can’t ye guess what he’d say? ‘That’s a fine girl ye got, Burke! Why don’t ye make her listen to reason?’ And then he laughed, and told me old father he’d better learn to take a hint. ’Twas bad for an old man to sleep in the rain⁠—he might get carried off by pneumonia.”</p>
			<p>Hal could no longer keep back the question, “What did your father do?”</p>
			<p>“I’d not have ye think hard of my old father,” she said, quickly. “He used to be a fightin’ man, in the days before O’Callahan had his way with him. But now he knows what a camp-marshal can do to a miner!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
