<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
			<p>It was the surging up in Jessie Arthur of that instinctive self, the creature of hereditary cruelty, of the existence of which Hal had no idea. She drew back, and there was a quiet <i xml:lang="fr">hauteur</i> in her tone as she spoke. “Hal, come here, please.”</p>
			<p>He came; and she waited until he was close enough for intimacy, and then said, “Have you forgotten you have to take me back to the train?”</p>
			<p>“Can’t you come with me for a few minutes?” he pleaded. “It would have such a good effect if you did.”</p>
			<p>“I can’t go into that crowd,” she answered; and suddenly her voice trembled, and the tears came into her sweet brown eyes. “Don’t you know, Hal, that I couldn’t stand such terrible sights? This poor girl⁠—she is used to them⁠—she is hardened! But I⁠—I⁠—oh, take me away, take me away, dear Hal!” This cry of a woman for protection came with a familiar echo to Hal’s mind. He did not stop to think⁠—he was moved by it instinctively. Yes, he had exposed the girl he loved to suffering! He had meant it for her own good, but even so, it was cruel!</p>
			<p>He stood close to her, and saw the love-light in her eyes; he saw the tears, the trembling of her sensitive chin. She swayed to him, and he caught her in his arms⁠—and there, before these witnesses, she let him press her to him, while she sobbed and whispered her distress. She had been shy of caresses hitherto, watched and admonished by an experienced mother; certainly she had never before made what could by the remotest stretch of the imagination be considered an advance towards him. But now she made it, and there was a cry of triumph in her soul as she saw that he responded to it. He was still hers⁠—and these low people should know it, this “other girl” should know it!</p>
			<p>Yet, in the midst of this very exultation, Jessie Arthur really felt the grief she expressed for the women of North Valley; she really felt horror at the story of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Zamboni’s “man”: so intricate is the soul of woman, so puzzling that faculty, older than the ages, which enables her to be hysterical, and at the same time to be guided in the use of that hysteria by deep and infallible calculation.</p>
			<p>But she made Hal realise that it was necessary for him to take her away. He turned to Mary Burke and said, “Miss Arthur’s train is leaving in a short time. I’ll have to take her hack, and then I’ll go to the pit-mouth with you and see what I can do.”</p>
			<p>“Very well,” Mary answered; and her voice was hard and cold. But Hal did not notice this. He was a man, and not able to keep up with the emotions of one woman⁠—to say nothing of two women at the same time.</p>
			<p>He took Jessie out, and all the way hack to the train she fought a desperate fight to get him away from here. She no longer even suggested that he get decent clothing; she was willing for him to come as he was, in his coal-stained mining-jumpers, in the private train of the Coal King’s son. She besought him in the name of their affection. She threatened him that if he did not come, this might be the last time they would meet. She even broke down in the middle of the street, and let him stand there in plain sight of miners’ wives and children, and of possible newspaper reporters, holding her in his arms and comforting her.</p>
			<p>Hal was much puzzled; but he would not give way. The idea of going off in Percy Harrigan’s train had come to seem morally repulsive to him; he hated Percy Harrigan’s train, and Percy Harrigan also, he declared. And Jessie saw that she was only making him unreasonable⁠—that before long he might be hating her. With her instinctive <i xml:lang="fr">savoir faire</i>, she brought up his suggestion that she might find someone to chaperon her, and stay with him at North Valley until he was ready to come away.</p>
			<p>Hal’s heart leaped at that; he had no idea what was in her mind⁠—the certainty that no one of the ladies of the Harrigan party would run the risk of offending her host by staying under such circumstances.</p>
			<p>“You mean it, sweetheart?” he cried, happily.</p>
			<p>She answered, “I mean that I love you, Hal.”</p>
			<p>“All right, dear!” he said. “We’ll see if we can arrange it.”</p>
			<p>But as they walked on, she managed, without his realising it, to cause him to reflect upon the effect of her staying. She was willing to do it, if it was what he wanted; but it would injure, perhaps irrevocably, his standing with her parents. They would telegraph her to come at once; and if she did not obey, they would come by the next train. So on, until at last Hal was moved to withdraw his own suggestion. After all, what was the use of her staying, if her mind was on the people at home, if she would simply keep him in hot water? Before the conversation was over Hal had become clear in his mind that North Valley was no place for Jessie Arthur, and that he had been a fool to think he could bring the two together.</p>
			<p>She tried to get him to promise to leave as soon as the last man had been brought out of the mine. He answered that he intended to leave then, unless some new emergency should arise. She tried to get an unqualified promise; and failing in that, when they had nearly got to the train she suddenly made a complete surrender. Let him do what he pleased⁠—but let him remember that she loved him, that she needed him, that she could not do without him. No matter what he might do, no matter what people might say about him, she believed in him, she would stand by him. Hal was deeply touched, and took her in his arms again and kissed her tenderly under the umbrella, in the presence of the wondering stares of several urchins with coal-smutted faces. He pledged anew his love for her, assuring her that no amount of interest in mining-camps should ever steal him from her.</p>
			<p>Then he put her on the train, and shook hands with the departing guests. He was so very sombre and harassed-looking that the young men forbore to “kid” him as they would otherwise have done. He stood on the station-platform and saw the train roll away⁠—and felt, to his own desperate bewilderment, that he hated these friends of his boyhood and youth. His reason protested against it; he told himself there was nothing they could do, no reason on earth for them to stay⁠—and yet he hated them. They were hurrying off to dance and flirt at the country club⁠—while he was going back to the pit-mouth, to try to get <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Zamboni the right to inspect the pieces of her “man”!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
