<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
			<p>So the time passed in a way that was pleasant. Jessie was completely won by this little Dago mine-urchin, in spite of all his frightful curse-words; and Hal saw that she was won, and was delighted by the success of this experiment in social amalgamation. He could not read Jessie’s mind, and realise that underneath her genuine delight were reservations born of her prejudices, the instinctive cruelty of caste. Yes, this little mine chap was a cherub, now; but how about when he grew big? He would grow ugly and coarse-looking, in ten years one would not know him from any other of the rough and dirty men of the village. Jessie took the fact that common people grow ugly as they mature as a proof that they are, in some deep and permanent way, the inferiors of those above them. Hal was throwing away his time and strength, trying to make them into something which Nature had obviously not intended them to be! She decided to make that point to Hal on their way back to the train. She realised that he had brought her here to educate her; like all the rest of the world, she resented forcible education, and she was not without hope that she might turn the tables and educate Hal.</p>
			<p>Pretty soon Rosa finished nursing the baby, and Jessie remarked the little one’s black eyes. This topic broke down the mother’s shyness, and they were chatting pleasantly, when suddenly they heard sounds outside which caused them to start up. It was a clamour of women’s voices; and Hal and Rosa sprang to the door. Just now was a critical time, when every one was on edge for news.</p>
			<p>Hal threw open the door and called to those outside “What is it?” There came a response, in a woman’s voice, “They’ve found Rafferty!”</p>
			<p>“Alive?”</p>
			<p>“Nobody knows yet.”</p>
			<p>“Where?”</p>
			<p>“In Room Seventeen. Eleven of them⁠—Rafferty, and young Flanagan, and Johannson, the Swede. They’re near dead⁠—can’t speak, they say. They won’t let anybody near them.”</p>
			<p>Other voices broke in; but the one which answered Hal had a different quality; it was a warm, rich voice, unmistakably Irish, and it held Jessie’s attention. “They’ve got them in the tipple-room, and the women want to know about their men, and they won’t tell them. They’re beatin’ them back like dogs!”</p>
			<p>There was a tumult of weeping, and Hal stepped out of the cabin, and in a minute or so he entered again, supporting on his arm a girl, clad in a faded blue calico dress, and having a head of very conspicuous red hair. She seemed half fainting, and kept moaning that it was horrible, horrible. Hal led her to a chair, and she sank into it and hid her face in her hands, sobbing, talking incoherently between her sobs.</p>
			<p>Jessie stood looking at this girl. She felt the intensity of her excitement, and shared it; yet at the same time there was something in Jessie that resented it. She did not wish to be upset about things like this, which she could not help. Of course these unfortunate people were suffering; but⁠—what a shocking lot of noise the poor thing was making! A part of the poor thing’s excitement was rage, and Jessie realised that, and resented it still more. It was as if it were a personal challenge to her; the same as Hal’s fierce social passions, which so bewildered and shocked her.</p>
			<p>“They’re beatin’ the women back like dogs!” the girl repeated.</p>
			<p>“Mary,” said Hal, trying to soothe her, “the doctors will be doing their best. The women couldn’t expect to crowd about them!”</p>
			<p>“Maybe they couldn’t; but that’s not it, Joe, and ye know it! They been bringin’ up dead bodies, some they found where the explosion was⁠—blown all to pieces. And they won’t let anybody see them. Is that because of the doctors? No, it ain’t! It’s because they want to tell lies about the number killed! They want to count four or five legs to a man! And that’s what’s drivin’ the women crazy! I saw <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Zamboni, tryin’ to get into the shed, and Pete Hanun caught her by the breasts and shoved her back. ‘I want my man!’ she screamed. ‘Well, what do you want him for? He’s all in pieces!’ ‘I want the pieces!’ ‘What good’ll they do you? Are you goin’ to eat him?’ ”</p>
			<p>There were cries of horror now, even from Jessie; and the strange girl hid her face in her hands and began to sob again. Hal put his hand gently on her arm.</p>
			<p>“Mary,” he pleaded, “it’s not so bad⁠—at least they’re getting the people out.”</p>
			<p>“How do ye know what they’re doin’? They might be sealin’ up parts of the mine down below! That’s what makes it so horrible⁠—nobody knows what’s happenin’! Ye should have heard poor <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rafferty screamin’. Joe, it went through me like a knife. Just think, it’s been half an hour since they brought him up, and the poor lady can’t be told if her man is alive.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
