<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
			<p>The town of Pedro stood on the edge of the mountain country; a straggling assemblage of stores and saloons from which a number of branch railroads ran up into the canyons, feeding the coal-camps. Through the week it slept peacefully; but on Saturday nights, when the miners came trooping down, and the ranchmen came in on horseback and in automobiles, it wakened to a seething life.</p>
			<p>At the railroad station, one day late in June, a young man alighted from a train. He was about twenty-one years of age, with sensitive features, and brown hair having a tendency to waviness. He wore a frayed and faded suit of clothes, purchased in a quarter of his home city where the Hebrew merchants stand on the sidewalks to offer their wares; also a soiled blue shirt without a tie, and a pair of heavy boots which had seen much service. Strapped on his back was a change of clothing and a blanket, and in his pockets a comb, a toothbrush, and a small pocket mirror.</p>
			<p>Sitting in the smoking-car of the train, the young man had listened to the talk of the coal-camps, seeking to correct his accent. When he got off the train he proceeded down the track and washed his hands with cinders, and lightly powdered some over his face. After studying the effect of this in his mirror, he strolled down the main street of Pedro, and, selecting a little tobacco-shop, went in. In as surly a voice as he could muster, he inquired of the proprietress, “Can you tell me how to get to the Pine Creek mine?”</p>
			<!-- TODO invigourating -> invigorating? -->
			<p>The woman looked at him with no suspicion in her glance. She gave the desired information, and he took a trolley and got off at the foot of the Pine Creek canyon, up which he had a thirteen-mile trudge. It was a sunshiny day, with the sky crystal clear, and the mountain air invigourating. The young man seemed to be happy, and as he strode on his way, he sang a song with many verses:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Old King Coal was a merry old soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a merry old soul was he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made him a college all full of knowledge⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hurrah for you and me!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh, Liza-Ann, come out with me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moon is a-shinin’ in the monkey-puzzle tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, Liza-Ann, I have began</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sing you the song of Harrigan!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He keeps them a-roll, this merry old soul⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wheels of industree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A-roll and a-roll, for his pipe and his bowl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his college facultee!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh, Mary-Jane, come out in the lane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moon is a-shinin’ in the old pecan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, Mary-Jane, don’t you hear me a-sayin’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll sing you the song of Harrigan!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So hurrah for King Coal, and his fat payroll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his wheels of industree!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurrah for his pipe, and hurrah for his bowl⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hurrah for you and me!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh, Liza-Ann, come out with me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moon is a-shinin’⁠—”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And so on and on⁠—as long as the moon was a-shinin’ on a college campus. It was a mixture of happy nonsense and that questioning with which modern youth has begun to trouble its elders. As a marching tune, the song was a trifle swift for the grades of a mountain canyon; Warner could stop and shout to the canyon-walls, and listen to their answer, and then march on again. He had youth in his heart, and love and curiosity; also he had some change in his trousers’ pocket, and a ten dollar bill, for extreme emergencies, sewed up in his belt. If a photographer for Peter Harrigan’s General Fuel Company could have got a snapshot of him that morning, it might have served as a “portrait of a coal-miner” in any “prosperity” publication.</p>
			<p>But the climb was a stiff one, and before the end the traveller became aware of the weight of his boots, and sang no more. Just as the sun was sinking up the canyon, he came upon his destination⁠—a gate across the road, with a sign upon it:</p>
			<blockquote class="sign">
				<p>
					<strong>Pine Creek Coal <abbr>Co.</abbr><br/>
					Private Property<br/>
					Trespassing Forbidden</strong>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Hal approached the gate, which was of iron bars, and padlocked. After standing for a moment to get ready his surly voice, he kicked upon the gate and a man came out of a shack inside.</p>
			<p>“What do you want?” said he.</p>
			<p>“I want to get in. I’m looking for a job.”</p>
			<p>“Where do you come from?”</p>
			<p>“From Pedro.”</p>
			<p>“Where you been working?”</p>
			<p>“I never worked in a mine before.”</p>
			<p>“Where did you work?”</p>
			<p>“In a grocery-store.”</p>
			<p>“What grocery-store?”</p>
			<p>“Peterson &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr>, in Western City.”</p>
			<p>The guard came closer to the gate and studied him through the bars.</p>
			<p>“Hey, Bill!” he called, and another man came out from the cabin. “Here’s a guy says he worked in a grocery, and he’s lookin’ for a job.”</p>
			<p>“Where’s your papers?” demanded Bill.</p>
			<p>Everyone had told Hal that labour was scarce in the mines, and that the companies were ravenous for men; he had supposed that a workingman would only have to knock, and it would be opened unto him. “They didn’t give me no papers,” he said, and added, hastily, “I got drunk and they fired me.” He felt quite sure that getting drunk would not bar one from a coal camp.</p>
			<p>But the two made no move to open the gate. The second man studied him deliberately from top to toe, and Hal was uneasily aware of possible sources of suspicion. “I’m all right,” he declared. “Let me in, and I’ll show you.”</p>
			<p>Still the two made no move. They looked at each other, and then Bill answered, “We don’t need no hands.”</p>
			<p>“But,” exclaimed Hal, “I saw a sign down the canyon⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That’s an old sign,” said Bill.</p>
			<p>“But I walked all the way up here!”</p>
			<p>“You’ll find it easier walkin’ back.”</p>
			<p>“But⁠—it’s night!”</p>
			<p>“Scared of the dark, kid?” inquired Bill, facetiously.</p>
			<p>“Oh, say!” replied Hal. “Give a fellow a chance! Ain’t there some way I can pay for my keep⁠—or at least for a bunk tonight?”</p>
			<p>“There’s nothin’ for you,” said Bill, and turned and went into the cabin.</p>
			<p>The other man waited and watched, with a decidedly hostile look. Hal strove to plead with him, but thrice he repeated, “Down the canyon with you.” So at last Hal gave up, and moved down the road a piece and sat down to reflect.</p>
			<p>It really seemed an absurdly illogical proceeding, to post a notice, “Hands Wanted,” in conspicuous places on the roadside, causing a man to climb thirteen miles up a mountain canyon, only to be turned off without explanation. Hal was convinced that there must be jobs inside the stockade, and that if only he could get at the bosses he could persuade them. He got up and walked down the road a quarter of a mile, to where the railroad-track crossed it, winding up the canyon. A train of “empties” was passing, bound into the camp, the cars rattling and bumping as the engine toiled up the grade. This suggested a solution of the difficulty.</p>
			<p>It was already growing dark. Crouching slightly, Hal approached the cars, and when he was in the shadows, made a leap and swung onto one of them. It took but a second to clamber in, and he lay flat and waited, his heart thumping.</p>
			<p>Before a minute had passed he heard a shout, and looking over, he saw the Cerberus of the gate running down a path to the track, his companion, Bill, just behind him. “Hey! come out of there!” they yelled; and Bill leaped, and caught the car in which Hal was riding.</p>
			<p>The latter saw that the game was up, and sprang to the ground on the other side of the track and started out of the camp. Bill followed him, and as the train passed, the other man ran down the track to join him. Hal was walking rapidly, without a word; but the Cerberus of the gate had many words, most of them unprintable, and he seized Hal by the collar, and shoving him violently, planted a kick upon that portion of his anatomy which nature has constructed for the reception of kicks. Hal recovered his balance, and, as the man was still pursuing him, he turned and aimed a blow, striking him on the chest and making him reel.</p>
			<p>Hal’s big brother had seen to it that he knew how to use his fists; he now squared off, prepared to receive the second of his assailants. But in coal-camps matters are not settled in that primitive way, it appeared. The man halted, and the muzzle of a revolver came suddenly under Hal’s nose. “Stick ’em up!” said the man.</p>
			<p>This was a slang which Hal had never heard, but the meaning was inescapable; he “stuck ’em up.” At the same moment his first assailant rushed at him, and dealt him a blow over the eye which sent him sprawling backward upon the stones.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
