<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
			<p>This programme was a convenient one for Hal; but as he was to find almost at once, it had been adopted too late. He and Jerry started after the crowd, which had stopped in front of one of the company buildings; and as they came nearer they heard someone making a speech. It was the voice of a woman, the tones rising clear and compelling. They could not see the speaker, because of the throng, but Hal recognised her voice, and caught his companion by the arm. “It’s Mary Burke!”</p>
			<p>Mary Burke it was, for a fact; and she seemed to have the crowd in a kind of frenzy. She would speak one sentence, and there would come a roar from the throng; she would speak another sentence, and there would come another roar. Hal and Jerry pushed their way in, to where they could make out the words of this litany of rage.</p>
			<p>“Would they go down into the pit themselves, do ye think?”</p>
			<p>“They would not!”</p>
			<p>“Would they be dressed in silks and laces, do ye think?”</p>
			<p>“They would not!”</p>
			<p>“Would they have such fine soft hands, do ye think?”</p>
			<p>“They would not!”</p>
			<p>“Would they hold themselves too good to look at ye?”</p>
			<p>“They would not! They would not!”</p>
			<p>And Mary swept on: “If only ye’d stand together, they’d come to ye on their knees to ask for terms! But ye’re cowards, and they play on your fears! Ye’re traitors, and they buy ye out! They break ye into pieces, they do what they please with ye⁠—and then ride off in their private cars, and leave gunmen to beat ye down and trample on your faces! How long will ye stand it? How long?”</p>
			<p>The roar of the mob rolled down the street and back again. “We’ll not stand it! We’ll not stand it!” Men shook their clenched fists, women shrieked, even children shouted curses. “We’ll fight them! We’ll slave no more for them!”</p>
			<p>And Mary found a magic word. “We’ll have a union!” she shouted. “We’ll get together and stay together! If they refuse us our rights, we’ll know what to answer⁠—we’ll have a <em>strike</em>!”</p>
			<p>There was a roar like the crashing of thunder in the mountains. Yes, Mary had found the word! For many years it had not been spoken aloud in North Valley, but now it ran like a flash of gunpowder through the throng. “Strike! Strike! Strike! Strike!” It seemed as if they would never have enough of it. Not all of them had understood Mary’s speech, but they knew this word, “Strike!” They translated and proclaimed it in Polish and Bohemian and Italian and Greek. Men waved their caps, women waved their aprons⁠—in the semidarkness it was like some strange kind of vegetation tossed by a storm. Men clasped one another’s hands, the more demonstrative of the foreigners fell upon one another’s necks. “Strike! Strike! Strike!”</p>
			<p>“We’re no longer slaves!” cried the speaker. “We’re men⁠—and we’ll live as men! We’ll work as men⁠—or we’ll not work at all! We’ll no longer be a herd of cattle, that they can drive about as they please! We’ll organise, we’ll stand together⁠—shoulder to shoulder! Either we’ll win together, or we’ll starve and die together! And not a man of us will yield, not a man of us will turn traitor! Is there anybody here who’ll scab on his fellows?”</p>
			<p>There was a howl, which might have come from a pack of wolves. Let the man who would scab on his fellows show his dirty face in that crowd!</p>
			<p>“Ye’ll stand by the union?”</p>
			<p>“We’ll stand by it!”</p>
			<p>“Ye’ll swear?”</p>
			<p>“We’ll swear!”</p>
			<p>She flung her arms to heaven with a gesture of passionate adjuration. “Swear it on your lives! To stick to the rest of us, and never a man of ye give way till ye’ve won! Swear! <em>Swear!</em>”</p>
			<p>Men stood, imitating her gesture, their hands stretched up to the sky. “We swear! We swear!”</p>
			<p>“Ye’ll not let them break ye! Ye’ll not let them frighten ye!”</p>
			<p>“No! No!”</p>
			<p>“Stand by your word, men! Stand by it! ’Tis the one chance for your wives and childer!” The girl rushed on⁠—exhorting with leaping words and passionate out-flung arms⁠—a tall, swaying figure of furious rebellion. Hal listened to the speech and watched the speaker, marvelling. Here was a miracle of the human soul, here was hope born of despair! And the crowd around her⁠—they were sharing the wonderful rebirth; their waving arms, their swaying forms responded to Mary as an orchestra to the baton of a leader.</p>
			<p>A thrill shook Hal⁠—a thrill of triumph! He had been beaten down himself, he had wanted to run from this place of torment; but now there was hope in North Valley⁠—now there would be victory, freedom!</p>
			<p>Ever since he had come to the coal-country, the knowledge had been growing in Hal that the real tragedy of these people’s lives was not their physical suffering, but their mental depression⁠—the dull, hopeless misery in their minds. This had been driven into his consciousness day by day, both by what he saw and by what others told him. Tom Olson had first put it into words: “Your worst troubles are inside the heads of the fellows you’re trying to help!” How could hope be given to men in this environment of terrorism? Even Hal himself, young and free as he was, had been brought to despair. He came from a class which is accustomed to say, “Do this,” or “Do that,” and it will be done. But these mine-slaves had never known that sense of power, of certainty; on the contrary, they were accustomed to having their efforts balked at every turn, their every impulse to happiness or achievement crushed by another’s will.</p>
			<p>But here was this miracle of the human soul! Here was hope in North Valley! Here were the people rising⁠—and Mary Burke at their head! It was his vision come true⁠—Mary Burke with a glory in her face, and her hair shining like a crown of gold! Mary Burke mounted upon a snow-white horse, wearing a robe of white, soft and lustrous⁠—like Joan of Arc, or a leader in a suffrage parade! Yes, and she was at the head of a host, he had the music of its marching in his ears!</p>
			<p>Underneath Hal’s jesting words had been a real vision, a real faith in this girl. Since that day when he had first discovered her, a wild rose of the mining-camp taking in the family wash, he had realised that she was no pretty young working-girl, but a woman with a mind and a personality. She saw farther, she felt more deeply than the average of these wage-slaves. Her problem was the same as theirs, yet more complex. When he had wanted to help her and had offered to get her a job, she had made clear that what she craved was not merely relief from drudgery, but a life with intellectual interest. So then the idea had come to him that Mary should become a teacher, a leader of her people. She loved them, she suffered for them and with them, and at the same time she had a mind that was capable of seeking out the causes of their misery. But when he had gone to her with plans of leadership, he had been met by her corroding despair; her pessimism had seemed to mock his dreams, her contempt for these mine-slaves had belittled his efforts in their behalf and in hers.</p>
			<p>And now, here she was taking up the role he had planned for her! Her very soul was in this shouting throng, he thought. She had lived the lives of these people, shared their every wrong, been driven to rebellion with them. Being a mere man, Hal missed one important point about this startling development; he did not realise that Mary’s eloquence was addressed, not merely to the Rafferties and the Wauchopes, and the rest of the North Valley mine-slaves, but to a certain magazine-cover girl, clad in a mackintosh and a pale green hat and a soft and filmy and horribly expensive motoring veil!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
